Now for a short demonstration of the WebSocket functionality of our feedback app ARSnova.
This demo shows two different browsers running ARSnova in the role of student. Two different students are shown.
As you can see, there's quite some traffic, not generated by current MOOC participants,
but I have used Apache JMeter, a load generation and performance tool we have already used in Web Engineering I.
As you can see, the tool generates virtual users who take different roles and perform different actions at the same time.
Those virtual users generate the load in the background we see visualized as bar charts.
Now, how can we perceive WebSocket behavior?
The fact that the bars are updated synchronously is simply due to the use of AJAX in the first place.
That means, XML HTTP requests are send to to the backend to get the current feedback votes.
As soon as I click on a smiley in a browser, you'll see that the respective bar is incremented by one and this happens synchronously in all browser windows.
If I had two mice, I could have done that in both browsers at the same time (just kidding).
You see, the app reacts in real time.
The same is true in the other browser. And in the background, the virtual Apache JMeter users do their job.
When designing ARSnova, we came to the conclusion that we would have to build a WebSocket connection.
In a live session with 10 student developers who used a feedback system in conventional technique,
we found that they didn't have the feeling that their feedback was counted because Polling or Long Polling always causes delays.
Due to the utilization of the network, the WLAN capacity and the access point we eventually could poll only every few minutes.
So that when clicking on a smiley, the reaction of the system was far from immediate.
The user experience of such a system is very poor.
So we started to think about new technologies and at that time, WebSockets came up.
That was some years ago, Google started to implement WebSockets in Google Chrome, followed by Firefox and Safari ...
Today, all modern browsers support WebSocket.